Over the next few minutes. I don't plan to change the blueprint
of your life, your career, or even your tomorrow.
But I do plan to challenge what you think about it,
because what I've learned has changed my tomorrows,
my career and my life. But before
I start, I want to introduce you to someone who's here with me today.
This is Uncle Harry. Oh, you can't see him. Oh,
then picture this. Uncle Harry's a little shorter than me,
a lot grayer. He has this bushy moustache,
wears a white lab coat with a black stethoscope around his neck,
and always has this unlit cigarette dangling out
of his mouth. He served with distinction in the Canadian Navy
in World War II and went on to become one of Montreal's most
beloved pediatricians. All his little patients called
him Uncle Harry. In fact, many of them still do.
So I'm 19 years old, just returned from a European vacation
with a gray tan, a bushy haircut and a
long beard, ready to begin my major
in biology at McGill University, headed towards well,
I'm not sure where I'm headed, which is why I go to see Uncle Harry
for advice. He being a doctor and all.
But what he tells me is not what I expect.
Norm, he says, think of your career
as a river, and you have a choice.
You can launch your boat in the water and
paddle upstream towards a goal you think you want,
only to find you arrive there exhausted and it isn't what you
want. Or you can steer your boat
downstream and find all the bends and turns which
provide you opportunities you never could have imagined.
That's what I did. And I've had the most incredible
career. And one more thing, Norm. Whatever it
is you do, make sure you come to love it.
Wow. That was very serious advice.
So what did I do with it? I think I did what most first year
university students would do. I gathered together with my buddies
and we went to see The Rocky Horror Picture Show about
15 times. No, I never discussed Uncle
Harry's advice with anyone for almost 40 years.
But it's just a few weeks later, I'm standing
in my first biology lab at McGill University.
It is huge. We're in the big leagues. There are microscopes all
over. I'm standing in front of one looking for a
fungus, and I move my slide up
and down, back and forth, and I see nothing.
And I keep trying, and I'm just getting more frustrated. And I start to
sweat because there's this impatient lying growing behind
me. Finally, I find that fungus.
At this point, I have another F word for it. And then I feel
this presence behind me and this little whisper.
You're never going to love this. I bend
over, pick up my backpack, head down the corridor
to my course advisor's office.
Barbara, how do I get out of this? Well,
Barbara, listens to my rant. And being the scientist she is, she keeps
a very straight face and finally just asks me two questions.
Norm, forget about school for a minute.
What is it you like and what interests you?
Oh, well, that was easy. Math,
logical puzzles, argument. Barbara helps
me find a law course being given the next semester to replace the lost lab
credit legal problems of the poor. It's being given
by a young Montreal lawyer by the name of Bob Cooper. Well,
you know how it is when you really connect with a teacher. Bob and
I hit it off. In fact, by the end of semester,
bob has me convinced to make an application to law school.
He even writes me the letter of reference that helps me get in.
Bob Cooper changed the course of my river.
But you want to know something else? Bob Cooper didn't
love being a lawyer anymore. He told me he had this dream
of becoming a film producer. He'll roll the camera
forward 20 years and Bob Cooper
has become the president of HBO Pictures in Los Angeles. He then
goes on to work for Steven Spielberg at DreamWorks and forms his
own film and television production company and becomes
one of my clients, uncle Harry's River.
But it was way more complicated than that. So let
me start with the night that I met Pierre Elliot Trudeau.
He had just shocked the country by announcing he was resigning as prime minister
and was going to join a small Montreal law firm,
heenan Blakey, where I happened to be working as a young lawyer.
While Roy Heenan was so excited with the national news that
he held a little soiree at his house for all of us to go meet
Mr. Trudeau. I went, but I didn't really want
to be there. I don't know about you, but I wasn't
really comfortable in those kind of social environments. I'm terrible at
small talk. I'll have to say something to him and he's never
going to remember me anyway. So as soon as it's feasible,
I make my excuses, head for the door, and who should be
standing there, not that far from me with his coat on?
Yep. Pierre Trudeau. Well, as we head
out into the snowy cold, I get all climbed up,
like I know I have to say something. And I hear these words coming
out of my mouth. Can I offer you a lift home,
sir? My little hatchback is
parked across the street. There's a car seat in the back. I can't remember when
the last time was I cleaned it up.
Oh, my God. And he says yes. Like, what am I going to
say? He's maybe the most famous prime minister in Canadian history and
I'm nobody. When we get to the
car, get in. And I have this flash.
We have one thing in common.
How are your children? I ask. Well, he starts
to talk and he doesn't stop talking. Until we get home.
I discovered that his oldest child,
Justin, was just a young teenager, and he's quite disappointed
in him. When I was a boy, he said it was before
the days of television. I listened to radio for amusement. I read
the classics. But Justin, all he's interested
in is watching reruns of this film called Star
Wars. And then he said the words I would never forget.
I have no idea what is to become of that boy.
Who can possibly judge the course of anyone's river.
From Star Wars superfan to high school teacher
to the luke Skywalker of Canada, that was
his journey. But my boat, it was going nowhere.
I felt like I was drifting. In fact, by my yearend
review, my boss says to me, norm, you have a lot of
potential, but there's something missing,
and I just can't tell you what it is. You couldn't tell
me what it was? Was he serious? How could I fix
myself if I didn't know what was wrong with me?
Well, I went home all depressed, and my wife, Sharon, talked to me all night.
I think I was getting good at listening. And finally she said,
Norm, I don't think the problem is you, but there's
a problem with your approach. You need to take a little
initiative. You need to take charge.
Take charge? It was like she lit a
flame. Okay? It was more like a match to start, but enough to illuminate
Uncle Harry. He didn't say, Put your boat in the
river. He said spirit.
I was missing a rudder. I went back
to work the next day, angry mostly at myself.
I'd spent four years waiting for the work to arrive on
my desk. Four years waiting for my career
to happen to me. Well, no more.
From that point on, I took charge of everything in my career,
from what I was doing, more important to why I was doing it,
and most important, to how I could distinguish myself.
I found a very narrow area of Canadian tax law to specialize in
the financing of movies and television shows.
The industry was still fairly young, and a lot of people thought I
should have my head examined, because who knew where that was going?
But producers in Toronto began to take notice,
and that was the interesting thing. I didn't notice change so much in me
as much as in other people's reactions
to me. I began to speak with a little more authority.
My confidence grew.
Cut to the next scene. New Year's Eve,
1989. We're sitting at home. Sharon is pregnant
with our fourth child. But I feel something growing
in me as well, something that needs to be born
immediately. And the words just come bursting out.
That's it. We're moving to Toronto. That's where our
future is. Well, we talked about it all night through
the next day. I got ready because I had to go meet with
a managing partner peanut Blakey and Peter. Blakey is this big,
imposing man with a booming voice.
But call. How can I help you?
I was a little nervous. Okay, I was a lot nervous.
But I summoned my courage. Peter, I'd like to open the
Heen and Blakey office in Toronto. I took
charge. Well, six months later,
the baby is born. We pack up the truck. We move down the 401.
Shortly after that, we have our opening party in Yorkville. And who
should be there? None other than Pierre Trudeau. And we
talk.
So that got me to Toronto. Taking charge
was the beginning, but it wasn't enough, because did I have any idea how
to run an office? I had no idea, no idea
how to build an organization. But I was about to learn from a
very interesting, inspirational source.
My son Brian is getting bullied in grade one. So we start him in karate,
and I decide to join him. We walk into
the dojo, and I see this sign on the wall,
and it says, regardless of the number of years of
practice, you will never advance without singleminded
determination. Singleminded determination.
I understand why it's there. So white belts like Brian and I
will fight through those moments of difficulty, the pain.
When we look at the black belts and we see we can never be that.
We will stick with it. We will be determined.
We will develop a fighting spirit. Well,
spoiler alert. I stay with the karate for almost 20 years
and achieve my third degree or sundown in
terms of black belt. In fact, to break the tension, I wouldn't
mind sparring right now. And I gathered Justin used to do some boxing,
so bring it on. But he's got enough
problems. Single minded determination became
my mantra. It helped me get through those moments of doubt when others doubted
me, when I doubted myself. Every consultant I spoke
to said, there is no way your startup
will ever compete with the major firms in Toronto. Not possible.
And that became my marketing approach.
We are the underdogs. We are determined.
We will compete. Cut and fade into the
next scene. It's almost 25 years later,
and we have done it. We have built this glorious national
firm with international dimensions. My career,
as well, has blossomed. I've gone from representing small,
independent producers to becoming an adviser to
major Hollywood studios. I was sitting
in the boardroom the day that the decision to produce The Hunger Games
was made. How cool was that? In fact,
it was unimaginable. And that was my ride.
But there was one more thing I needed in my boat that helped me get
there. And it wasn't so much something I learned as something
that I had to unlearn. And that was that
failure was the adversary. It's something you'll also have
to unlearn. Failure is not your adversary. It is your
teacher.
Failure is not the boulder in the river that's
going to crush you unless you let your fear of it crush you.
Interesting. See, as a managing partner,
I learned that one out of every four decisions I
made was going to be wrong. One in four.
And I wasn't so much about the successes as what I learned
from the mistakes and the failures. How we
adjusted, how we moved forward, how we were able to compete. So I could
give you lots of examples of how I overcame fair failure
and the mistakes that were made and the rejections that we suffered. But I'm only
going to give you one. Seven years ago,
my boat capsized. I was drowning.
One year after I'd stepped down from my leadership position, the law firm
that I had helped build collapsed.
Boom. The shockwaves of the tsunami could
be felt from coast to coast. The greatest failure
in Canadian law firm history. That's the way the national media
was reporting it in its final two months. I returned to a
leadership position in an effort to save it. But I failed.
1110 people out of work. The feeling
of loss, indescribable.
Have you ever lost anything near or dear to you?
If you haven't, eventually you will. Because it's
called life. You see, Uncle Harry's River isn't just filled with opportunities.
It's got rocks and rapids, and every once in a while you miss the final
turnoff before the falls. So I had a choice.
I could give up, drown, disappear into retirement,
or I could start over. Now, it's one thing to start when
you're in your twenties, but is any different when you're in your late fifty
s. I was about to find out.
I found a day job, and I began to write at night.
I had no intention of writing a book. I was pretty certain I could never
write a book. But I needed to process my feelings, my anger.
I began to write down my stories. And I wrote
night after night, week after week, month after month, until I
discovered I was starting to like it.
I was exactly where you are right now,
discovering an interest, trying to determine if it
might lead to another river. There was only one problem.
I didn't have sufficient skill as a writer. And that's
when it hit me. Flashed to the vignettes of Barbara
and Bob Cooper, Royhan and Pierre Trudeau, my wife Sharon,
my partners, all the mentors along the way. I didn't do
it myself the first time I needed paddlers in my
boat, but where to find them?
I was home alone, like so many of us are these days.
I went online. I picked
up books on writing by Stephen King and others. I read my favorite authors.
I looked up a couple of authors online and asked if they wouldn't mind critiquing
my work. I got started on my path on my river.
And seven years later, once more,
I am at this unimaginable point in my life.
Norman Buckle, author.
I stay in touch with Uncle Harry. We talk from time to time.
Okay? Mostly he listens. But he was right.
Success is not a ladder. It's not a straight line. It's filled with bends and
turns and falling out of the boat and climbing back in.
Discovering you didn't drown,
you've just learned how to swim. So that's
been my journey up until now. And it's been a glorious one.
But it's taken guts and filled me with exhilaration.
But that's been my choice. But what about you?
What are you going to choose? And here are
my words of advice. Launch your boat in your river.
Work on developing your skills. Take charge of your decisions.
Don't be afraid to make mistakes. Don't be afraid to fail.
Be determined. Work through those moments of doubts.
And never be ashamed to ask for help.
That is how you can become the person you can't
imagine. And that's for Uncle Harry.
Well, once more, he's shuffling off the stage,
back bent, began hanging
a little lower, that cigarette still dangling out of his mouth
as he leaves us.
He never waves goodbye, because, really,
he this speech has been
dedicated to the memory of Dr. Harry Lyon Becaul,
member of the Order of the British Empire, for distinguished
military service. May his memory be a blessing and
his legacy, his words and thank you.